				STATEMENT OF PURPOSE

Imagine a world where a computer can compose symphonies like Mozart’s or sonnets like Shakespeare’s. A world where machines think and understand in the same way as humans do, building such a world is my motivation to do a Master’s in Computer Science.

Right from childhood, I developed an interest in mathematics and excelled at it. In my 10th Grade, I was selected to attend prestigious OCSC camps conducted by HBCSE - These are conducted by the government of India and only 35 students from all over India are chosen and are trained to represent India in various international olympiads. After my schooling, I wanted to pursue Computer Science because it gives me the ability to make a difference to the world using mathematics and logic. My hard working nature and determined approach helped me in securing All India 14th rank in IIT - Joint Entrance Examination competing with about half a million students. Thus, I got into Computer Science department at IIT Bombay, which is considered as one of the best places for imparting computer education in India. College has been a very fruitful experience. The courses offered here provided me a solid foundation in the various areas of Computer Science and helped me to expand my horizons further.

Currently, I am working on my undergraduate thesis in the area of cloud security under the guidance of Prof. R.K. Shyamasundar. We are working on developing an information flow model, Readers-Writers Flow Model (RWFM) and trying to apply it to MapReduce systems like Hadoop. RWFM is called using explicit readers and writers that provides a label model for capturing relationships and constraints of information flow among the stakeholders. To this end, I am working with the internals of Hadoop Distributed File System and Hadoop MapReduce system and finding ways to integrate this model with Hadoop. 

Apart from regular college curriculum, I have also worked at industry for a couple of summer internships. I believe that an internship at industry helps in bridging the gap between theory and the application. I wanted to know whether a career in industry or academia would suit me more. Also, I felt that the best way to test the concepts learnt at college is by putting it to practise and this can be done by doing internships at industry. Concepts being taught in the college can be put to practise and they would nicely complement each other.

In the summer of 2014, I was a software intern at a new startup - Housing.com, an online real estate portal. I worked on creating a conversion funnel, a web application that shows the percentage of users dropping at every page in the website from start till end. Every action of a user/viewer, such as a click or opening a new page is collected into a database. I devised a linear-time algorithm that runs on this database and gives what percentage of users are actually availing the services provided by the portal and shows what percentage of people dropped off at various locations in between. As most websites tend to be changed at frequent intervals, I made the process flexible enough that the system would work with minor tweaks even if the original website is modified. I used various technologies like Django and NoSQL databases. The final implemented version is a scalable one and could handle up to 30 million entries within 4 seconds. This tool has found a widespread use by the company’s marketing people, User Interface designers who perform A/B testing, and every other department that concerns with increasing user traffic into the website.
After working at a startup, I wanted to work at an established company that is an expert in its field so that I could learn more from the experienced professionals working there. At the end of my junior year, I secured an internship at Amazon, as a software developer. I worked in the team that deals with customized products at Amazon (http://www.amazon.com/b?node=11032013011) My work involved building API Test Suites for two internal APIs of Amazon. For this, I prepared detailed test plans, acceptance criteria and test scenarios for each service and implemented them using workflow engines, TestNG and Java. Thus, I had a good experience and completed my internship to the utmost satisfaction of my mentors.

I strongly believe that both academics and extracurriculars play a vital role in moulding one’s personality. I have enthusiastically participated in many extracurricular activities both at school and undergraduate level. In my sophomore year, I worked as a class representative for a batch of 98 people. I have also worked for the college newspaper and contributed to an article about Academic Ethics. 

During my last semester, I took a course on Artificial Intelligence (AI). I was interested in the course attributing to my innate interest in intelligent machines. As a part of it, I gave a talk on solving the Travelling Salesman Problem (TSP) using Particle Swarm Optimisation (PSO) and discussed its performance with Genetic Algorithm. To this end, I performed literature survey on TSP, PSO and Genetic algorithms. After studying these algorithms, I got more interested in the field and studied several other publications from IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation and Elsevier’s journals on Artificial Intelligence. I was particularly fascinated by Prof. Marco Dorigo’s ideas of applying ant’s behaviour to AI and methods like Simulated Annealing. I found studying the research papers very interesting. After working on this, I inculcated a habit of going a bit further in the process of learning. The very idea of taking an existing problem and tackling it using known methods from diverse fields and trying to improvise the solution has drawn me further towards pursuing a career in research. After working on various fields and establishing my interests, I want to pursue a career in the fields of AI and ML. I see Master’s as a first step in this process.

While undergrad provided me with a great opportunity to explore various topics in breadth, I couldn’t explore any particular topic in depth. Masters would provide me with the right skillset needed for the career I aim for, one that involves solving complex problems and innovation in the fields of Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML). XYZ has an active research community in the fields of AI and ML. I am particularly interested in the work going on in the ABC lab and their implementations. I wish to work in those labs and under the able guidance of professors. 

Currently, I am not particularly bent upon whether choosing a career in Academia or Industry. I am open to the one which provides me with great opportunities to work with in the fields of my interest. I feel that doing Master’s is not only going to provide me with enough expertise required in this regard, but also provide me sufficient time and experience to mull over this more. After my masters, I envision myself contributing to these fields, trying to make machines more intelligent and bringing them closer to humans more than ever.




// Rough drafts
Should add - 
Should add why I chose a BTP in different field (Could say you wanted to do a breadth wise exploration of topics, before deciding what to eventually work on)
Why I did intern at Amazon when I like research
Why applying for non-thesis masters when I have a research orientation (Better is to say that you want to figure out what you want to do in your PhD first, before making that decision)
More about thesis
Make transitions smoother

While undergrad provided me with a great opportunity to explore topics in breadth, I couldn’t explore any particular topic in depth. My exposure to Artificial Intelligence was through the course I took. Also, my interest in these topics springed during the same. 


After working on various fields and establishing my interests, I want to pursue a Master’s in Computer Science with a special emphasis in the areas of Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning. As a part of undergraduate curriculum, I took a course on Artificial Intelligence and my interest in this area springed during that. The very idea of making intelligent machines fascinated me. As a part of it, I gave a presentation on solving the Travelling Salesman Problem (TSP) using Particle Swarm Optimisation (PSO) and discussed its performance with Genetic Algorithm. To this end, I performed literature survey on TSP, PSO and Genetic algorithms. After studying these algorithms, I got more interested in the field and studied several other publications from IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation and Elsevier’s journals on Artificial Intelligence. I was particularly fascinated by Prof. Marco Dorigo’s ideas of applying ant’s behaviour to AI and methods like Simulated Annealing. I found various applications of AI very interesting. Also, Machine learning has played the most important role in revolutionizing the digital world; its effect visible in everyday applications like web search and social networks. With more and more data becoming available, the possibilities seem endless. Whenever I think of future of computer science, I hardly think of any other field would have as big an impact as these. The very idea of impacting the world in a large mannar has drawn me towards pursuing a research in these fields. I see masters as a first step in this process. Masters would provide me with the right skillset needed for the career I aim for, one that involves solving complex problems and innovation in the fields of Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML). 

XYZ has an active research community in the fields of AI and ML. I am particularly interested in the work going on in the ABC lab and their implementations. I wish to work in those labs and under the able guidance of professors. 

Currently, I am not particularly bent upon whether choosing a career in academia or industry. I am open to the one which provides me with great opportunities to work with in the fields of my interest. I feel that doing Master’s is not only going to provide me with enough expertise required in this regard, but also provide me sufficient time and experience to mull over this more. After my masters, whether it is through academic research or industrial research, I envision myself contributing to these fields, trying to make machines more intelligent and bringing them closer to humans more than ever.

